everyone so today I'm going to discuss
food safe methods of treating water in
aquaponics and other systems that
contain fish or plants that are intended
for human consumption what sparked me to
make this video is that I've seen a
number of videos on YouTube of people
adding the chlorinators and other
products that are available at pet
stores to their aquaponic systems and
doing this is really not a good idea
because many of these products contain
chemicals and substances that are toxic
to humans and they really should not be
ingested if you read some of the labels
they have this warning that I have
written here for ornamental fish use
only not to be used on fish intended for
human consumption so not only can these
chemicals contaminate the fish in your
system but they can also accumulate in
the plants that you're growing they can
lead to human disease if they're
chronically ingested so I'm not going to
go over ingredients that are specific to
each product because you can easily find
this information online but I just want
to give an example of some of the
chemicals that are found in common pet
store D chlorinators now I don't know
what a lot of these chemicals do and I'm
sure that some of them are probably not
toxic but there is one specific
ingredient that I have found on the
bottles of pet store D chlorinators that
is a known carcinogen or cancer-causing
agent and it's found in some common D
chlorinators that people are using and
that ingredients formaldehyde sodium
bisulfite so when the label says for
ornamental fish juice only not to be
used on fish intended for human
consumption I think it's a really good
idea to follow this warning because you
really don't want to be eating
formaldehyde it's obviously not good for
you that's something that's used in
preserving bodies after their they after
people have died and it's not something
you should be eating while you're still
alive so many of you are probably
wondering well can I just let my water
sit out overnight and let the chlorine
evaporate from my tap water well yeah in
certain areas you can do this if your
municipal water is treated with
hypochlorous acid
or just plain old chlorine but in most
areas or urban areas or cities the
municipal water is treated with
chloramine which is also toxic to fish
like chlorine but it's more stable and
it's doesn't evaporate when you expose
it to light and air like chlorine does
so I live in Center City Philadelphia
and my tap water is treated with
chloramines and I want to show you the
way that I remove these chloramines from
my water to make it safe for my fish and
still safe for me to eat the plants that
I'm growing in my aquaponic system and
to do to do this I rely on good
old-fashioned vitamin C so vitamin C or
ascorbic acid acts as a reducing agent
and it dissociates the chloramine into
ammonium and chloride so this is nice
because the chloride is then able to
evaporate from the water when it's
exposed to air and light if you let your
water sit out and the ammonium component
feeds right into the nitrogen cycle of
the aquarium providing extra nitrogen to
the plants so what I do is I break up
one 500 milligram tablet of vitamin C
and I add it to about 5 gallons of tap
water so from what I've read this is
more than enough to catalyze this
reaction and I let the water with the
vitamin C sit out for about 8 to 12
hours before I add it to my system and I
really haven't had any problems yet and
it's been working really great for me
the only potential problem that you
could have with this method is that
you're introducing small amounts of
hydrogen ions or acid to your system
which could slightly lower the pH in
your aquarium but I haven't had any
problems with this yet and my pH has
been steady at 7.0 so this drawing shows
the reaction so you have chloramine plus
vitamin c saying goes to ammonium
chloride and i hydrous korvac acid the
ammonium feeds into your nitrogen cycle
and the chloride will eventually
evaporate as chlorine gas so this is a
really great way to de chlorinate your
water
and it's safe for both you and your fish
and I hope you found this video helpful
and please comment and if you have any
questions feel free to ask thanks bye